---
layout: post
title:  "Week 4"
date:   2020-01-28 20:24:35 +0000
---

* Please gosh don’t let this be a waste of £100 of kit because I got excited about on a whim and will never think about again, but I bought my first [__Raspberry Pi and an 8x8 NeoPixel__](https://www.adafruit.com/product/1487). I’ve got dreams of making a simulation where tiny one-pixel men defend their one-pixel homes from one-pixel combatants. I’ve got a massive space in my new factory-office to fill and a story telling light installation will be wonderful to fill it with. I’ve a few more projects to finish before I can start learning about soldering pins and fixing timing bugs though.
* I went to another fantastic [__Murder Myster__](https://murder.co.uk/) last weekend. We didn’t quite solve it but we were so close. Tip for me to remember next time we go: find out what kicked off the murders and you’ve solved the whole thing. The same motive might apply to multiple cast members, and _when_ the murders start will distinguish them. Tim and I went to bed at 3:30am on Saturday, with not a single clue. We were both frustrated, I think. Then, in the morning, with hours to hand in our sheet Tim’s dad cracked a password and we were on a roll again.
* We signed up for __HelloFresh__ again and have started cooking more. This is almost entirely down to [Tom Staurt]( https://tomstu.art/) and his Instagram videos getting me excited about cooking again.
* I’m more and more annoyed with companies using “plant-based” when they mean “made with vegan products, but in a meaty area”. Biggest offenders: Subway, KFC, Burger King. Brady on Hello Internet was talking about plant-based becoming a new phrase because vegan is too loaded. I actually think “plant-based” is being pushed by food manufacturers to get away with lazy food hygiene but still trying to sell to vegans.
* I’m going back to struggling with adventure writing now.

