---
layout: post
title:  "Week 12: I played some games"
date:   2020-03-18 19:31:05 +0000
---

The most interesting thing that happened this week was that I spent a bunch of time playing through most of the [Humble Choice]( https://www.humblebundle.com/subscription?refc=6nE8CQ) I got this weekend. FYI. I didn’t play very much of these games, so maybe they change in their second act.
* *Battle Chasers: Nightwar.* I didn’t play very much of this. If this game taught me anything about game development, it’s that you need to put your cool mechanic right up front. I played for a little while, and I wasn’t taken by anything. The battle system is Final Fantasy-like. You control a bunch of characters each with their own style of attacks and resources you have to keep an eye on – mostly mana. You can get your favourite Final Fantasy game on PC and Switch now though, so if that’s the cool mechanic – being like Final Fantasy – then just play Final Fantasy. _Likelihood of me going back to it: 2/5._
* *EXAPUNKS.* In the vein of games where you write code to solve problems. One of the problems – getting your bot to walk a tree – completely flummoxed me. I called in my (developer) boyfriend and we both sat around it for a little while. It’s fun to write code in a small, low entry, language. The world building is pretty darned nifty. The first thing it does is ask you to print off a zine. Really well written. One of the issues is that the linear story it’s telling (so far) forces you to choose of a set of choices you’d never actually make, or say something that’s clearly the wrong thing to say. I’m excited to get back to it though. _Likelihood of me going back to it: 5/5._
* *Death’s Gambit.* I wouldn’t have ever picked up this game to play if I wasn’t forcing myself to go through this month’s Choices, but I’m really glad I did. It’s a 2d action game that feels like what a game made in the 80’s wishes it could have, if it had an extra 200Mb of diskspace. I started as the “easy” class, the Fighter and struggled a lot with his sluggish weapon. I switched to the rogue guy and the game is so much more fluid. You may like one-hit-kills-things-really-slowly though, but I like the responsiveness of hitting a button and slashing a dude. It’s still crushingly difficult though. Death is an expected part of the game though, and a lot of the story is told through it. _Likelihood of me going back to it: 5/5._
* *198X.* You have to go into this game realising that you’re in for an interactive film experience. There are long periods in-between games where you put the controller down and just soak in the music and superb pixel art. The game walks you through a collection of arcade and old school games. Now that I’m thinking about it, I’m not sure you can even go back to those “mini”-games once you’ve completed them. It’s all just a way a telling a story of the neglected and despondent youth which we all felt, regardless of the amount of love in our life. _Likelihood of me going back to it: 4/5._
* *Niffelheim.* Don’t get me wrong – it’s in a totally different style – but I think this is Nordic theme, side-view Stardew. There’s a tech tree, you collect items, you put those items together to make other items. It fills the space of relaxation by doing menial work that farm/graveyard simulators do. With these things, I’m never sure when the next feature is going to unlike and give me an extra 3 hours play time, but right now I think I’ll stick with Graveyard Keeper. _Likelihood of me going back to it: 3/5._
* *AI War II.* I played this for ten seconds, noted the similarities and complexities that I remembered from AI War, and then closed it. _Likelihood of me going back to it: 1/5._
* *Etherborn.* A perspective, gravity puzzle game. I didn’t play this for very long either, because I had to cook my tea. After that, I went back to Death’s Gambit. :shrug: _Likelihood of me going back to it: 1/5._
