---
layout: post
title: Yearnotes - 2021
date: 2022-01-06 17:12 +0000
---

I should come here more often and then maybe you'd get less of a stream of consciousness. It is what it is.

* I left my previous place of employment this year. The hunt for a job was a
  weird one. There's still no struggle for a software developer to find
  somewhere else, but some businesses are putting very unusual barriers in
  place. During one particular process, after two interviews, they asked me to
  do a Myers Briggs like test wherein - and I'm not exaggerating here - they
  asked "Would your mother consider you a joyous person?" I got a rejection
  from these people, _based on this questionnaire_.
* I now find myself in a much larger team - larger than I'd usually be
  interested in. However, it's been a delight. With three dozen developers
  comes great pace, platforms built solidly, and always a mentor around with
  time. We have a team dedicated to making the lives of developers better by
  (in part) ensuring their local setups are cleverly thought out. I type
  `vagrant up` and I have the whole ecosystem running locally with
  production-like datasets. It's wonderful.
* This year I released [a podcast about
  writing](https://podcasts.apple.com/gb/podcast/the-writers-apprentice/id1566915062),
  which was the closest thing to feeling productive and creative I've done in a
  while. I've been quite pleased with the response; people have been kind. It
  might be fun to do something else like that again, but I perpetually struggle
  with _having literally nothing to say_ which is ordinarily a fine state for a
  human, but leaves me feeling terribly unimportant.
* I continue to struggle to find a printer that works as I want. It took seven
  months and a replacement for Epson to say, "that's just the normal quality of
  the printer." I contacted someone from PrinterLand.co.uk and they immediately
  told me, "yes, you don't want that for printing nice things. You should try
  the Epson XP15000, a photo printer." I exasperatedly asked, "but that has a
  lower printing DPI than the Workforce I have. What part of the specification
  tells me the XP is a better printer?" The guy responded, "there's nothing in
  the specs. You have to be in the industry to understand what makes a good
  printer." Ladies and gentlemen, the printing industry is a sham.
* Due to the chip shortage, and then a festive related pecuniary shortage, I've
  not got the printer yet but will report back.
* I've been bookbinding a whole bunch, and am getting better at it every time.
  Next year will certainly be the year most people get notebooks from me as
  gifts. I'm buying and building bulkier and bulkier equipment for this hobby
  and a surprising amount of expensive cardboard.
* I'm having a very bad time getting a particular project going, and it's
  _shockingly_ simple so my failure is extra frustrating. I want to get a Pi to
  continually play The Matrix on a loop, remembering where it left off, and
  immediately starting against once power has been restored. Dodgy old Pis,
  cables left in the wrong house, SD cards giving up. Christ.
* I've done very little with my garden this year which brings me great shame.
  It hasn't actually made it onto my themes for the year, so I suppose shame
  isn't a great motivator for me.
* I've always been excited about owning a shop, and am currently saving for
  such an adventure. Leasing is fairly expensive, despite high streets becoming
  barren. I recently thought to myself, for the first time, I could instead
  just get a mortgage for commercial building. This helps the dream happen much
  faster and is financially less risky since I could rent it out until I'm
  ready to leave full time work. My partner, jokingly, said, "just mind you
  don't become a robber land baron" and it shook me more than it should have.
  Suddenly, I'm questioning everything about land ownership.
* My podcast of the year award goes to [Comedy! Bang!
  Bang!](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/comedy-bang-bang-the-podcast/id316045799)
* We're watching Poirot. It's good. Modern Family disappeared from Netflix,
  which is most distressing.
