---
layout: post
title: There are aliens in the solar system (but probably not on Earth)
date: 2024-12-29 12:35 +0000
---

<img src="/assets/europa/Europa-Natural-Colour.png" />

Launched in October, this year, is a mission that scientists have said is most
likely to find the possibility of life. Not random scientists. NASA scientists!
This mission is to a moon in our own solar system - in our own backyard. One
scientist said that if we *did not* find life there, it would be
"profound".[^cox]

The mission is to Europa and it is incredibly exciting.

Europa is a moon of Jupiter; it's the fourth largest of its 95 moons and is one
of the reasons early philosophers knew the Earth to not be the centre of the
universe.[^centre] There are a bunch of reasons this cold rock is of such
interest. In short:

1. We're almost certain it has a salt water, *liquid* ocean.
2. We're almost certain is has to tectonic-like movement.
3. We've made some wild guesses about some discolouration, which could be an
   organic compound.

The current state of understanding of the fundamental requirements for life are:

1. Water
2. Energy
3. Essential chemical building blocks[^building-blocks]

Hold on a second. Holy crumbs. *Do they all match with our expectations of
Europa?* Yes!

The fact that Europa's **water** is almost certainly salt water - we know this
because it has an unusual magnetic interference that we know is caused by large
bodies of salt water - does not hinder life at all. Life started on earth in
our salt water oceans. In fact, most life continues to live in those oceans.

There are three ways we know[^i-know] of that Europa uses to access **energy**.
The first is the most obvious, but is also the least useful: sunlight. Whilst
we get almost all of our energy from Sol, Jupiter is 780 million kilometres
away from the sun. That's five times further than we are. It will be getting
some energy from it, but not so much.

The second method is also similar to Earth: an iron core. It's likely that
this, or at least the surrounding crust of this core, is molten enough to
produce under-sea volcanoes. You'll note that these exact kinds of "vents" are
where Earth-life began. This heat energy comes from Jupiter's gravitational
energy flexing the moon's geology. Europa has an elliptical orbit around the
gas giant, so its pull to the planet is waxing and waning - pulling and
relaxing the iron core. This causes friction. Much like friction you're used
to, it produces heat. It's not only the heat from the core though: the icy
crust of the moon also shifts and slides as it thaws, freezes, and is pulled
(by Jupiter). That too keeps the planet from falling to absolute zero.

A third method is also one we use on Earth: radiation. Europa is constantly
bathed in incredibly high levels of radiation from Jupiter. Whilst we know this
is typically very bad for Earthen life, there are two reasons we still hope to
find Europan life. First, signs of life are expected to be underneath the icy
crust. This crust is 150 kilometres thick of ice as hard as granite. That
provides a considerable shield. Second, maybe life, evolved under high
radiation, finds a way.

We know Europa has a high amount of energy because we've seen the ice heal
itself. So, liquid water must be coming from below and refreezing when cracks
or collisions with meteors occur. There are shockingly few meteor craters on
Europa. It's the smoothest rock in our entire solar system. We also know that
there are huge pressures moving the ice: Europa has distinctive lines, as if
the ice has been torn apart. The only way we know that happens is through
tectonic movement as we see on Earth.

But what about those **building blocks**? This is another completely
fascinating part of Europa. Those volcanoes are crucial here: they act as big,
alchemical melting pots where chemistry just accidentally happens,
producing carbons and those other essential materials. But it's not likely an
ocean planet can provide that entirely. We've seen sulfuric acid and sulfur
dioxide, even hydrogen peroxide, on the moon which it just can't make itself.
So there where did it come from?

Io is another moon of Jupiter which is much closer to its parent body, and so
much more bathed in the boiling radiation. There is no water on Io, at least
not for billions of years. It would boil off instantly. It has almost no
atmosphere and is bursting with energy that presents itself in near constant,
explosive volcanoes. Since the atmosphere is so weak, anything it chucks up is
ejected from the planet.  It's expected that these compounds are thrown into
space, which Europa scoops up. Then, Europa's rolling ice pulls that under to
the oceans below.

## Europa Clipper

We first saw Europa in 1610 through a telescope on Earth. Since then we've
developed better imaging and lens, but the tiny moon is still very far away.
So, in 1973 Pioneer 10 managed to obtain some kind of blurry images, but still
enough to reveal more secrets to scientists. In 1979, Voyager 2 took a fudging
beautiful photo of Europa. These clearer images gave us a lot of excitement
about water on the moon. We seemed to stop caring until the late 90's, when the
Galileo space probe was sent on an eight year orbit of Jupiter. In 2007 we sent
New Horizons, which was on its way to Pluto. In 2022, Juno flew by Europa just
352 kilometres above the surface!

Each new mission got us more and more excited about finding another place in
the system which could have life on it. So, the Europa Clipper was launched a
couple of months ago.

It has a long journey to go on, and not a direct one! It is not currently going
towards Jupiter. Instead, its first going to Mars where it will slingshot
around, using its gravity to get an extra boost. That's a huge saving on fuel!
Then, it will actually come back to Earth for a similar manoeuvre. It'll skim
past us 3200 kilometres away, so not likely visible. At that point, it will be
travelling at its fastest acceleration towards Jupiter. When it gets there, it
will need to use its engines again to break, *for six hours.* Imagine going so
fast in your car that you need to start breaking six hours before your
destination.

It will get to Jupiter in April 2030 and make its first flyby of Europa in
Spring 2031. The plan is for it to get 25 km from the surface. That's wild! The
ISS is 400 kilometres above Earth.

The Clipper is a dedicated mission to confirm the potential of habitability on
the planet. It's specifically outfitted with gear that will allow it to image
underneath the ice to double check our theory that there's a tonne of water
under there. It will be able to image every inch of the moon over its four
years of time orbiting Jupiter and Europa.

*Jupiter and Europa?* Yes! Due to the massive radiation around Jupiter, the
Clipper can't handle orbit around just Europa, which would leave it in the
highest bands of the radiation for too long. So, it will do an elliptical
orbit, swinging (literally!) around both Jupiter and Europa 49 times. Much of
the weight of the orbiter is the titanium and aluminium housing that protects
instruments from the worst of the blasts.

<img src="/assets/europa/orbit.jpeg" />

Like all our probes, Clipper will have solar panels. These guys are huge
though! Its solar array spans 30 metres and is 5 metres high. I don't entirely
understand what this energy is used for. Obviously, the tech on board uses it.
But can it use this energy for fuel? Or is it entirely reliant on the fuel it
has from Earth for movement? Or, does it not need to use fuel at all once it's
in the orbit it wants?

Staggeringly, the Clipper can communicate with us just fine using the Deep
Space Network. That's a whole other interesting topic which involves at least
four sets of 70 metre wide antenna, in three places on Earth.

At the end of the 49 flybys, the mission is expected to end. The Clipper, quite
pleased with itself, will nobly degrade onto the surface of Ganymede. I have
not found anyone talking about why Ganymede and not just onto Europa. I like to
think that it's because we're all quite hopeful that life is on Europa, and
we don't want to disturb it.

## Habitability

When NASA is reading from official statements, they make it quite clear that
this is not a life finding mission. They've no expectation of finding anything
alive up there, or so they say. The mission is to check if Europa does have
these three markers of life. And then, if there's nothing there, we know that
there must be another marker we've not realised yet.

However, watch any of the interviews with these scientists and they just can't
hide their excitement. There's high confidence that we'll find signs of
something on Europa. Likely, single celled stuff.

Earth has been through a number of near mass extinction events. Life on Earth
has been a single, uninterrupted thread of evolution for 4.1 billion years.
That's despite five major extinction events that drove life to its extremes.
Many times the planet has frozen over completely but never has our evolutionary
line been broken. The thing that saved us, time after time? A warm core, where
liquid water could continue to flow, fuelled by undersea vents throwing up
nutrients.

Just like on Europa.

<hr />
<br />
<br />
<br />

References in no order and loosely presented:

- [https://europa.nasa.gov/mission/faq/](https://europa.nasa.gov/mission/faq/)
- [https://science.nasa.gov/jupiter/moons/europa/](https://science.nasa.gov/jupiter/moons/europa/)
- [https://science.nasa.gov/mission/europa-clipper/](https://science.nasa.gov/mission/europa-clipper/)
- [https://europa.nasa.gov/mission/about/](https://europa.nasa.gov/mission/about/)
- [https://youtu.be/q88fSdGMbys](https://youtu.be/q88fSdGMbys)
- [https://www.loc.gov/programs/poetry-and-literature/poet-laureate/poet-laureate-projects/a-poem-for-europa/](https://www.loc.gov/programs/poetry-and-literature/poet-laureate/poet-laureate-projects/a-poem-for-europa/)
- [https://www.britannica.com/place/Europa-satellite-of-Jupiter](https://www.britannica.com/place/Europa-satellite-of-Jupiter)

<br />
<br />
<br />

[^building-blocks]: I've actually not looked into this. It's sort of obvious -
    you could make a guess at what this means - and also very complex. These
    chemicals are things like bonding agents (proteins, for instance),
    mechanisms for sending messages around the organism, ways of carrying
    energy to places its needed.

[^cox]: This was Professor Brian Cox, in Solar System (2024, BBC). Well worth
    watching. It's exciting and inspirational.

[^centre]: In 1610, two people discovered the four massive moons around
    Jupiter. Galileo Galilei and Simon Marius were both investigating Jupiter
    at the same time, curious about the fuzzy, dark patches they could see on
    their fuzzy telescopes. They both realised that these dark patches changed
    location, in the same way that our moon sometimes casts a shadow on Earth.
    This meant that there were other celestial bodies orbiting something other
    than Earth, proving the theory that Earth was not the most important planet
    (and shaking faith that The Maker cares all that much about us).

[^i-know]: At least three ways I know, and will be mentioning here. Maybe there
    are others.
