---
layout: post
title: Murder
date: 2024-12-05 18:35 +0000
---

There are secrets you uncover about your loved one's family after they begin to
let you into their inner circles. My partner's family has a particularly
unusual one: *murder.*

Joy Swift is cool for a number of reasons. Firstly because she managed to nab
the domain [murder.co.uk](https://murder.co.uk) but also *because she invented murder mystery
weekends*. She was given an MBE for it.

Joy and her team of actors run these weekends most weekends at hotels around
the country. You arrive on Friday, and get welcomed in, you get a lovely meal,
maybe play a game. You eye each person suspiciously, wondering if they're an
actor whilst you eat. But then the evening gets interrupted when someone gets
stabbed, poisoned, pushed, or tricked into their doom. Everyone, excited, gets
up and rushes to the scene of the crime. (Then you can return to your pudding.)

The police turn up and request that you stick around the hotel for the weekend
(or, if you like, don't stick around but be back for afternoon tea). On
Saturday, a number of evidence boards appear in a nearby room that the police
are working out of where they'll slowly put up pieces that are interesting to
the case.

You spend your time collating and asking questions about each piece - it all
has a meaning. The actors are around quite a lot of the time, and you can ask
them all sorts of terribly inappropriate questions. ("So, how long have you
been microwaving dolls? I need to see if that date lines up with this other
thing.")

It's not just the actors around to help though. It's wonderfully community
focused. *Everyone* is trying to crack the mystery. By Sunday morning, people
tend to guard their theories a bit more closely, but on Friday and Saturday
everyone is willing to give tips. "Have you seen that misspelling on the letter
to the bank?" The misspelling means nothing, but is incredibly exciting to
discover! There aren't many places on earth where sixty strangers can be in a
room together and each eagerly be helping each other. In fact, I know of some
people who attend these weekends alone, knowing that they will be able to join
a group if they want to.

Once all the evidence is up on the board, and all the arguments at dinners have
been had, and probably at least three people have been murdered, the police
officers are a key tool. They'll nudge you in the right direction. There are a
few of us who are desperate to crack it each weekend and can still be found in
the evidence room at 1am, bribing officers and other actors with glasses of
wine to stick around "for just a few more questions". At that point in the
evening, the nudges become a bit more distinct if you're quite far away from a
solution.

By the Sunday, I'm usually pretty exhausted. But it's the exhaustion of a good
weekend of sleuthing which is very rewarding.

Anyway, who knows how long Joy will keep running these events. I highly
recommend going along to one. They're always 5/5 star weekends.
